# COVID Readme

## Problem Statement
The COVID directory of this repository represents one of the three main components of our group project to identify areas at risk for both COVID-19 and other natural disasters. The COVID component of the project aims to identify areas at risk for COVID-19, so that these can be compared and overlaid with areas at risk for other natural disasters.

### Background:
COVID-19 is a type of coronovirus that was identified in late 2019. At the time that this project was conducted (mid-May, 2020), the disease had spread from China across most of the world. In the United States, the death toll from COVID-19 is estimated to have exceeded 80 thousand as of May 11th. Starting back in March 2020, most states had imposed stay-at-home orders and other restrictions on mobility in order to slow the spread of the disease. By early May, these policies had successfully brought both the infection and death rates under control in some states, which began a process of “reopening”. We are still in the early days of this new stage of the response to the virus, and the effects of this easing of restrictions on mobility and contact are still unclear.

### Geographic scope:
Our group decided to limit the geographical scope of our project to the United States. The main reason for this decision was that the data reported by other countries is highly inconsistent and unreliable. Most forecasts for the future spread of COVID-19 in the U.S. focus on the state as their main unit of analysis. Our project is therefore also focused on the 50 U.S. states. However, focusing only on the state level alone obscures the fact that each state comprises a diverse range of communities, which have been unevenly affected by COVID-19. We therefore decided to also conduct a more granular case study of the counties within one state. We chose California for the case study both because it is our home state and because it contains a particularly diverse set of county-level communities.

### Temporal scope:
We decided that we wanted to expand the temporal scope of our project through at least the summer months, because this is when many types of natural disasters are most likely to strike communities in various parts of the country (see the Natural Disaster component of the project). Although we were able to find state-level projections for COVID-19 that extend into August, we were unable to find the same range of forecasts at the county level. As a result, the temporal scope of our national analysis runs from mid-May to early August, but the scope of our California case study only runs from mid-May to mid-June.

### Specific questions:
The specific questions answered by the COVID component of our project are as follows: (1) Which states in the U.S. are most likely to experience severe COVID-19 conditions between mid-May and early August? (2) Which counties in California are most likely to experience severe COVID-19 conditions between mid-May and mid-June?


## Data Collection
To identify communities at risk for severe COVID conditions in the coming months, we collected projected data from leading research centers in the field of public health. Numerous organizations have created machine learning models to predict the future spread and impact of COVID-19. The models available offered a wide range of divergent projections due not only to their different algorithms, but also to an incomplete medical understanding of the disease and to uncertainties in the underlying reported data. We evaluated and selected projected data based on the criteria of expertise, transparency, and thoughtfulness of the models, as well as the relevancy of the information they provide for answering our specific questions.

### National Data
For our data on the national scale, we selected the projections generated by the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) at the University of Washington. The IHME model (after a major revision on May 4th) is a hybrid combination of a non-linear regression fit to the curve of COVID death rates and an SEIR (Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious-Recovered) model to simulate the spread of infectious diseases. It is one of the only respectable models to provide projections over multiple months into August, which allowed us to extend our study through the summer months when certain types of natural disasters are most likely to strike. Our evaluation of the IHME model shows that over the week from May 4th to May 11th, it can only explain 54% of the variance in the reported data and its predictions for the daily national increase in COVID infections have an approximate average error of 2,647 cases. This is a reminder of the uncertainty in these, and any, COVID projections. More information on the IHME model can be found [here](http://www.healthdata.org/sites/default/files/files/Projects/COVID/Estimation_update_050420.pdf).

### California Data
For our data on the county-level in California, we selected the projections generated by the Mailman School of Public Health (MSPH) at Columbia University. MSPH uses a metapopulation model that simulates the spread and growth of COVID-19 incidence in the US. Although the MSPH model only makes projections through June 20th, it is one of the few available models with a county-level resolution. The MSPH model implements different scenarios based on how quickly states reopen. For California, we selected the scenario in which the state gradually reopens with an increase in contact rates of 5% weekly. More information on the MSPH model can be found [here](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.05.04.20090670v2).


## Exploratory Data Analysis
For both the IHME and MSPH projected data, we reduced the shape of the data to our desired geographic scales (i.e. the United States and California, respectively). In the IHME dataset, we also dropped the incomplete data after August 4th. In the IHME dataset, this left us with 4,250 rows of data (85 days for each of the 50 states). In the MSPH dataset, we had 2,436 rows (42 days for each of the 58 counties).

The IHME dataset includes projections for many variables, such as hospital capacity, mobility rates, and cumulative deaths. However, the most important factor determining how a natural disaster would interact with the pandemic is the prevalence of the virus in the local community. We therefore decided to focus only on the estimated number of daily new infections, and to scale this figure in proportion to the size of the local population. Following California’s guidelines for the reopening of counties, we labeled communities (state or county) with one or more new daily infections per 10,000 residents as experiencing severe COVID conditions.

**Data Dictionary**

| Feature  | Description  |
|---|---|
|est_new_infections    |Estimated number of daily new infections   |
|est_population  |Estimated population size from 2019 based on the 2010 census   |
|daily_infection_rate  |Estimated number of daily new infections per 10,000 people in the local population   |
|severe   |1 if the daily infection rate is 1 or above; 0 if below 1   |


## Conclusions
Our analysis of the projections for the spread of COVID-19 shows that, even though the prevalence of the disease was already declining in many communities due to social distancing, a significant number of communities remain at risk for severe COVID conditions over the next few months. Most states are likely to have at least one day of severe COVID conditions, and some (such as North Carolina, Pennsylvania, and Arizona) are projected to remain under severe conditions until late July and into August. The national projections put the state of California around the mean for severe COVID conditions during this period. However, the more granular projections for the state itself reveals that less than half of California counties are likely to experience severe COVID conditions before the end of June. In other words, within California, the pandemic is likely to remain concentrated in a relatively small number of counties, mostly in Southern California around Los Angeles and in Northern California’s Bay Area around San Francisco. The other sections of this repository examine the likelihood that these same communities at risk for severe COVID conditions will also experience natural disasters at the same time.
